README.md, before:

## TODO Express API App

Let's build our own Node/Express API and test it out with Postman. We will use a PostgreSQL datastore and write raw SQL to query the database.

There is a Postman collection in this folder that contains the endpoints we'll build: `Pru_Todo_App.postman_collection.json`

## No Generator

1. `mkdir todo-app-no-generator`
    - This will create an empty directory for our Node application
1. `cd todo-app-no-generator`
    - `cd` into the directory we just created
1. `npm init -y`
    - This will create a `package.json` file to initialize our node application. 

        > `package.json` is a JSON file that lives in the root directory of your project. Your `package.json` holds important information about the project. It contains human-readable metadata about the project (like the project name and description) as well as functional metadata like the package version number and a list of dependencies required by the application.

1. `npm i cors express pg nodemon`

    - This will install a few node packages for us: 
        - `cors` - (helps with potential [cross-origin resource sharing issues](https://www.telerik.com/blogs/all-you-need-to-know-cors-errors#:~:text=CORS%20errors%20happen%20when%20a,by%20the%20server's%20CORS%20configuration.))
        - `express` -[Express](https://expressjs.com/) is a minimal and flexible Node.js web application framework that provides a robust set of features for web and mobile applications.
        - `pg` - [This package](https://www.npmjs.com/package/pg) allows us to connect with our Postgres database.
        - `nodemon` - [This will automatically restart](https://www.npmjs.com/package/nodemon) the node application when file changes in the directory are detected.

1. `touch index.js` - Running this command will create a file to serve as the entrypoint of our app.

    ```js
    // imports the express npm module
    const express = require('express'); 
    
    // imports the cors npm module
    const cors = require('cors'); 
    
    // imports the Pool object from the pg npm module, specifically
    const Pool = require('pg').Pool 
    
    // This creates a new connection to our database. Postgres listens on port 5432 by default
    const pool = new Pool({
      user: 'postgres',
      host: 'localhost',
      database: 'todo_app_db',
      password: 'postgres',
      port: 5432,
    })

    // Creates a new instance of express for our app
    const app = express(); 

    // .use is middleware - something that occurs between the request and response cycle.
    app.use(cors()) 

    // We will be using JSON objects to communcate with our backend, no HTML pages.
    app.use(express.json()) 

    // This route will return 'Hi There' when you go to localhost:3001/ in the browser
    app.get('/', (req, res) => {
      res.send('Hi There')
    });

    // This tells the express application to listen for requests on port 3001
    app.listen('3001', () => { })
    ```

1. In `package.json` let's update the start script to use `nodemon`. This way we don't have to stop and restart the server each time we make a change to our code.

    ```js
    "scripts": {
      "test": "echo \"Error: no test specified\" && exit 1",
      "start": "nodemon index.js" // ADD THIS LINE
    },
    ```

1. To start the server, run `npm run start`. Go to `localhost:3001` in the broswer. you should see this:

    ![](./assets/hi-there.png)

## Configure Postgres in the VM

The Postgres software runs a little differently in our VM than on a Mac or PC. You can read more about that [here](https://devopscube.com/install-configure-postgresql-amazon-linux/).

1. `sudo vi /var/lib/pgsql/data/pg_hba.conf`
1. Hit `i` to insert into the file.
1. Copy and paste this: `host    all          all            0.0.0.0/0  md5`
1. Hit `esc` then `:wq` to write and close the file.
1. Run `sudo systemctl restart postgresql` to restart the postgresql server.

## Create a sql file to create a table

There are several ways to create a database, a table, and seed it with some starter Todos. To make things simple, we'll create a `sql` file then run it to accomplish these objectives.

1. `mkdir db`
    - We'll create a separate directory for our database logic.
1. `touch db/todo.sql`

    ```sql
    CREATE TABLE todos (
      ID SERIAL PRIMARY KEY,
      title VARCHAR(50),
      done BOOLEAN
    );

    INSERT INTO todos (title, done)
    VALUES ('Get Milk', false), ('Walk Dog', false);    
    ```

    - This will create a table named `todos` and insert 2 starter todos. Feel free to add some of your own.

#### YOU DO (5 minutes)

Add a few more todos based on the `INSERT INTO` example above.


## Create the todos Database

1. Let's create the database. You can run this from anywhere on the command line since it's global: `createdb todo_app_db -U postgres`

    - Note - If you're asked, the default password for the `postgres` user is `postgres`

1. Run the sql file to create the table and add 2 todos: `psql -U postgres -d todo_app_db < db/todo.sql`

    - This command will run the `todo.sql` inside the `todo_app_db` we just created. __Make sure__ you're in the root directory of the app when you run this command, otherwise the `db/todo.sql` will need to be altered.
    - Note - If you're asked, the default password for the `-U postgres` user is `postgres`

1. To confirm this, we can check the `todo_app_db` database from inside the `psql` shell: `psql -d todo_app_db -U postgres`

1. `SELECT * FROM todos;`

    ![](./assets/psql.png)


## GET TODOS

We're gonna create CRUD (Create, Read, Update, Delete) functionality for for todos app. We'll start with Read.

1. You'll start to see a pattern as we build our routes. First, we'll define an HTTP verb and a method in the `index.js`. The route will accept `request` and `response` as arguments. We'll then write a database sql query inside the body like so:

    ```js
    app.get('/api/todos', (request, response) => {
        pool.query('SELECT * FROM todos ORDER BY id ASC', (error, results) => {
            if (error) throw error;

            console.log(results)
            response.status(200).json(results.rows)
        })
    })
    ```

    - You can add this route underneath the existing `app.get` method and above the `app.listen` in the `index.js` file.

1. Be sure to test this out in Postman with the provided collection of queries: `pru_todo_app.postman_collection.json`. When you open Postman, select "Open existing file", and open the collection.

  ![](./assets/postman-get-todos.png)

## CREATE A TODO

1. In `index.js`, you can add this code below the previous route. *Take a minute to consider what this code is doing.*

    ```js
    app.post('/api/todos', (request, response) => {
        const { title, done } = request.body

        pool.query('INSERT INTO todos (title, done) VALUES ($1, $2) RETURNING *', [title, done], (error, results) => {
            if (error) throw error;
            console.log(results)
            response.status(201).send(`Todo added with ID: ${results.rows[0].id}`)
        })
    });
    ```

1. Be sure to test this out in Postman with the provided collection of queries.

  ![](./assets/postman-create-todos.png)


## GET SINGLE TODO

1. In `index.js`, you can add this code below the previous route. *Take a minute to consider what this code is doing.*

    ```js
    app.get('/api/todos/:id', (request, response) => {
        const id = parseInt(request.params.id)
      
        pool.query('SELECT * FROM todos WHERE id = $1', [id], (error, results) => {
            if (error) throw error;
            response.status(200).json(results.rows)
        })
    });
    ```

1. Be sure to test this out in Postman with the provided collection of queries.

  ![](./assets/postman-get-single-todo.png)


## DELETE TODO

1. In `index.js`, you can add this code below the previous route. *Take a minute to consider what this code is doing.*

    ```js
    app.delete('/api/todos/:id', (request, response) => {
        const id = parseInt(request.params.id)
      
        pool.query('DELETE FROM todos WHERE id = $1', [id], (error, results) => {
            if (error) throw error;
            response.status(204).send(`Todo deleted with ID: ${id}`)
        })
    });
    ```

1. Be sure to test this out in Postman with the provided collection of queries. First, delete a todo then get all todos to confirm it's been deleted.

  ![](./assets/postman-delete-todo.png)



## UPDATE TODO

1. In `index.js`, you can add this code below the previous route. *Take a minute to consider what this code is doing.*

    ```js
    app.put('/api/todos/:id', (request, response) => {
        const id = parseInt(request.params.id)
        const { title, done } = request.body
      
        pool.query(
          'UPDATE todos SET title = $1, done = $2 WHERE id = $3',
          [title, done, id],
          (error, results) => {
            if (error) throw error;
            response.status(200).send(`Todo modified with ID: ${id}`)
        })
    });
    ```

    - Note - we need to send _both_ the `title` and `done` fields to the database even if we're updating only one. Otherwise, the other field will be updated with `null`. What are some strategies to avoid this? [Check this article.](https://medium.com/developer-rants/conditional-update-in-postgresql-a27ddb5dd35)

1. Be sure to test this out in Postman with the provided collection of queries.

  ![](./assets/postman-update-todo.png)


Congrats! You built a full CRUD Todo API application and tested the endpoints with Postman!

## References

- https://expressjs.com/en/starter/generator.html
- https://blog.logrocket.com/crud-rest-api-node-js-express-postgresql/#creating-postgresql-database
- https://git.generalassemb.ly/prudential-0921/installfest
- [What is package.json](https://heynode.com/tutorial/what-packagejson/)

Commit message:

added open in vs code instructions

README.md, after:

## TODO Express API App

Let's build our own Node/Express API and test it out with Postman. We will use a PostgreSQL datastore and write raw SQL to query the database.

There is a Postman collection in this folder that contains the endpoints we'll build: `Pru_Todo_App.postman_collection.json`

## No Generator

1. `mkdir todo-app-no-generator`
    - This will create an empty directory for our Node application
1. `cd todo-app-no-generator`
    - `cd` into the directory we just created
1. `npm init -y`
    - This will create a `package.json` file to initialize our node application. 

        > `package.json` is a JSON file that lives in the root directory of your project. Your `package.json` holds important information about the project. It contains human-readable metadata about the project (like the project name and description) as well as functional metadata like the package version number and a list of dependencies required by the application.

1. Open the application (so far) in VS Code: `code .`

1. `npm i cors express pg nodemon`

    - This will install a few node packages for us: 
        - `cors` - (helps with potential [cross-origin resource sharing issues](https://www.telerik.com/blogs/all-you-need-to-know-cors-errors#:~:text=CORS%20errors%20happen%20when%20a,by%20the%20server's%20CORS%20configuration.))
        - `express` -[Express](https://expressjs.com/) is a minimal and flexible Node.js web application framework that provides a robust set of features for web and mobile applications.
        - `pg` - [This package](https://www.npmjs.com/package/pg) allows us to connect with our Postgres database.
        - `nodemon` - [This will automatically restart](https://www.npmjs.com/package/nodemon) the node application when file changes in the directory are detected.

1. `touch index.js` - Running this command will create a file to serve as the entrypoint of our app.

    ```js
    // imports the express npm module
    const express = require('express'); 
    
    // imports the cors npm module
    const cors = require('cors'); 
    
    // imports the Pool object from the pg npm module, specifically
    const Pool = require('pg').Pool 
    
    // This creates a new connection to our database. Postgres listens on port 5432 by default
    const pool = new Pool({
      user: 'postgres',
      host: 'localhost',
      database: 'todo_app_db',
      password: 'postgres',
      port: 5432,
    })

    // Creates a new instance of express for our app
    const app = express(); 

    // .use is middleware - something that occurs between the request and response cycle.
    app.use(cors()) 

    // We will be using JSON objects to communcate with our backend, no HTML pages.
    app.use(express.json()) 

    // This route will return 'Hi There' when you go to localhost:3001/ in the browser
    app.get('/', (req, res) => {
      res.send('Hi There')
    });

    // This tells the express application to listen for requests on port 3001
    app.listen('3001', () => { })
    ```

1. In `package.json` let's update the start script to use `nodemon`. This way we don't have to stop and restart the server each time we make a change to our code.

    ```js
    "scripts": {
      "test": "echo \"Error: no test specified\" && exit 1",
      "start": "nodemon index.js" // ADD THIS LINE
    },
    ```

1. To start the server, run `npm run start`. Go to `localhost:3001` in the broswer. you should see this:

    ![](./assets/hi-there.png)

## Configure Postgres in the VM

The Postgres software runs a little differently in our VM than on a Mac or PC. You can read more about that [here](https://devopscube.com/install-configure-postgresql-amazon-linux/).

1. `sudo vi /var/lib/pgsql/data/pg_hba.conf`
1. Hit `i` to insert into the file.
1. Copy and paste this: `host    all          all            0.0.0.0/0  md5`
1. Hit `esc` then `:wq` to write and close the file.
1. Run `sudo systemctl restart postgresql` to restart the postgresql server.

## Create a sql file to create a table

There are several ways to create a database, a table, and seed it with some starter Todos. To make things simple, we'll create a `sql` file then run it to accomplish these objectives.

1. `mkdir db`
    - We'll create a separate directory for our database logic.
1. `touch db/todo.sql`

    ```sql
    CREATE TABLE todos (
      ID SERIAL PRIMARY KEY,
      title VARCHAR(50),
      done BOOLEAN
    );

    INSERT INTO todos (title, done)
    VALUES ('Get Milk', false), ('Walk Dog', false);    
    ```

    - This will create a table named `todos` and insert 2 starter todos. Feel free to add some of your own.

#### YOU DO (5 minutes)

Add a few more todos based on the `INSERT INTO` example above.


## Create the todos Database

1. Let's create the database. You can run this from anywhere on the command line since it's global: `createdb todo_app_db -U postgres`

    - Note - If you're asked, the default password for the `postgres` user is `postgres`

1. Run the sql file to create the table and add 2 todos: `psql -U postgres -d todo_app_db < db/todo.sql`

    - This command will run the `todo.sql` inside the `todo_app_db` we just created. __Make sure__ you're in the root directory of the app when you run this command, otherwise the `db/todo.sql` will need to be altered.
    - Note - If you're asked, the default password for the `-U postgres` user is `postgres`

1. To confirm this, we can check the `todo_app_db` database from inside the `psql` shell: `psql -d todo_app_db -U postgres`

1. `SELECT * FROM todos;`

    ![](./assets/psql.png)


## GET TODOS

We're gonna create CRUD (Create, Read, Update, Delete) functionality for for todos app. We'll start with Read.

1. You'll start to see a pattern as we build our routes. First, we'll define an HTTP verb and a method in the `index.js`. The route will accept `request` and `response` as arguments. We'll then write a database sql query inside the body like so:

    ```js
    app.get('/api/todos', (request, response) => {
        pool.query('SELECT * FROM todos ORDER BY id ASC', (error, results) => {
            if (error) throw error;

            console.log(results)
            response.status(200).json(results.rows)
        })
    })
    ```

    - You can add this route underneath the existing `app.get` method and above the `app.listen` in the `index.js` file.

1. Be sure to test this out in Postman with the provided collection of queries: `pru_todo_app.postman_collection.json`. When you open Postman, select "Open existing file", and open the collection.

  ![](./assets/postman-get-todos.png)

## CREATE A TODO

1. In `index.js`, you can add this code below the previous route. *Take a minute to consider what this code is doing.*

    ```js
    app.post('/api/todos', (request, response) => {
        const { title, done } = request.body

        pool.query('INSERT INTO todos (title, done) VALUES ($1, $2) RETURNING *', [title, done], (error, results) => {
            if (error) throw error;
            console.log(results)
            response.status(201).send(`Todo added with ID: ${results.rows[0].id}`)
        })
    });
    ```

1. Be sure to test this out in Postman with the provided collection of queries.

  ![](./assets/postman-create-todos.png)


## GET SINGLE TODO

1. In `index.js`, you can add this code below the previous route. *Take a minute to consider what this code is doing.*

    ```js
    app.get('/api/todos/:id', (request, response) => {
        const id = parseInt(request.params.id)
      
        pool.query('SELECT * FROM todos WHERE id = $1', [id], (error, results) => {
            if (error) throw error;
            response.status(200).json(results.rows)
        })
    });
    ```

1. Be sure to test this out in Postman with the provided collection of queries.

  ![](./assets/postman-get-single-todo.png)


## DELETE TODO

1. In `index.js`, you can add this code below the previous route. *Take a minute to consider what this code is doing.*

    ```js
    app.delete('/api/todos/:id', (request, response) => {
        const id = parseInt(request.params.id)
      
        pool.query('DELETE FROM todos WHERE id = $1', [id], (error, results) => {
            if (error) throw error;
            response.status(204).send(`Todo deleted with ID: ${id}`)
        })
    });
    ```

1. Be sure to test this out in Postman with the provided collection of queries. First, delete a todo then get all todos to confirm it's been deleted.

  ![](./assets/postman-delete-todo.png)



## UPDATE TODO

1. In `index.js`, you can add this code below the previous route. *Take a minute to consider what this code is doing.*

    ```js
    app.put('/api/todos/:id', (request, response) => {
        const id = parseInt(request.params.id)
        const { title, done } = request.body
      
        pool.query(
          'UPDATE todos SET title = $1, done = $2 WHERE id = $3',
          [title, done, id],
          (error, results) => {
            if (error) throw error;
            response.status(200).send(`Todo modified with ID: ${id}`)
        })
    });
    ```

    - Note - we need to send _both_ the `title` and `done` fields to the database even if we're updating only one. Otherwise, the other field will be updated with `null`. What are some strategies to avoid this? [Check this article.](https://medium.com/developer-rants/conditional-update-in-postgresql-a27ddb5dd35)

1. Be sure to test this out in Postman with the provided collection of queries.

  ![](./assets/postman-update-todo.png)


Congrats! You built a full CRUD Todo API application and tested the endpoints with Postman!

## References

- https://expressjs.com/en/starter/generator.html
- https://blog.logrocket.com/crud-rest-api-node-js-express-postgresql/#creating-postgresql-database
- https://git.generalassemb.ly/prudential-0921/installfest
- [What is package.json](https://heynode.com/tutorial/what-packagejson/)
